Hello everyone. Welcome back to a new episode of
The Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops,
and today I'm joined by a fellow YouTuber, Anna
Boke. She's been doing great videos on neo-liberalism and
many aspects related to. Neo neoliberalism we're going to
talk about today. So Anna, welcome to the show.
It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Hi, thank you for having me. I'm really excited.
It's like the first time I've ever been on
someone else's show, so kind of excited about it.
Yeah, great. So let me start by asking you,
I mean, because I, I've talked about this on
the channel with a few economists, but sometimes I
hear, and I've heard this also from uh liberal
people in Portugal, that neo-liberalism, the term doesn't mean
anything, it's just a vague term used by the
left, uh, I mean. How would you define a
neoliberalism more characterize it?
Yeah, I mean, it definitely like I've heard that
critique as well, um, about like it not existing
and just being invented by the left, but actually
I do think, um, it's very much a thing
and obviously, um, more economically conservative people don't like
to be called out on it, um, because they
obviously say, no, our policy is like totally sensible
and. But, um, it it's just like the rebrand
of like liberalism because I feel like not many
conservatives would say they're like economically like total liberals.
Um, BUT essentially what neoliberalism is in the most
broken down sense, it's just like this political economic
project that does lean on like, um, These, um,
Tenets of liberalism, uh, like markets over states, but,
um, I feel like they go even like a
step further embedding it even more in culture and
claiming that like human well-being comes from free markets,
private property and limited government intervention are important, but
also, um, Having like it being like less this
utopia of um freedom but more of a like
a project to like, restore elite class power by
like not only like being like, OK, free market
for everything, but also like there's people um that
profit a lot from government contracts and um while
all at the same time under like um like,
Call it or or like being all for these
um for these very, Liberal things like deregulation, privatization
and shrinking welfare, but at the same time, government
spending has never been higher, just like, not for
um welfare, but more for like, um, stuff that
serves some elites.
Yeah, I mean, I always found it a bit
weird that some people make this claim that neoliberalism
just isn't a thing or it's something invented by
The left just to bash uh right wingers are
being just against capitalism in general because I mean,
the IMF itself uses the term neoliberalism and not
just that, but I think that, I mean just
saying that neoliberalism favor favors deregulation, privatization, it is
against the welfare state, against. It, it undermines workers'
rights, workers' unions, and stuff like that. I mean,
I guess that's already defining the term,
right? Yeah, 100%, especially like the IMF being one
of the most neoliberal institutions there is. Um, IT
is kind of telling that they even use the
word.
Yeah, so I, I mean, and this is something
that you talk about in your, I, I think
it's the latest video, um. Because you talk a
lot about Naomi Oreske's book, The Big Myth, what
is the idea of market fundamentalism?
Um, YES, I was very inspired by her book.
It is, uh, and hers, and, um, uh, Michael
Conway, I think, yeah. Yeah,
I never remember
the name of the second book. I mean, she's
like first on the book, but then like it's
also him, I think. So, um, but it's like
written by both of them. But yeah, I feel
like um um I feel like neoliberalism and market
fundamentalism aren't exactly the same thing. Um, I feel
like market fundamentalism like focuses just on the market
aspect, um, that neoliberals claim that neoliberalism is. So
like as the market, it's like more of like
comparable to like liberalism, um, as like having the
market as like the all knowing God, um, having
deregulation, privatization and like that the individual is like
an entrepreneur that is responsible for his own successes
and failures and. Um Yeah, I feel like. That
is that those are like the big points of
like market fundamentalism, but I feel like that term
disregards that like we have like these big government
contracts, um, revolving door effects uh for leads and
stuff like that. So I feel like market fundamentalism
is really, um, that myth that the market is
infallible and almost mystically all knowing and um. Yeah,
and it's used to like the legitimate like the
legitimize um government action for welfare, for example, like,
or like for when markets fail, like for example,
child labor, which obviously is a market failure or
pollution and stuff like that, um, it is used
to like kind of sweep it under the rug
and be like, oh no, the market knows what
it's doing, like that's just so it will resolve
itself, which obviously it doesn't.
It's just externalities, right?
Yeah, those are externalities definitely are like they're very
negative externalities and markets fundamentalism says um that those
will resolve those will resolve themselves and it's not
going to be a problem long term.
Yeah, so I, I mean, but neoliberalism, how far
back would you go to place its origins? I
mean, because it, some people say that it developed
mainly during the 1960s, 1970s, but then, I mean,
I guess we can go back a little bit
more and talk about the work of Lud Ludwig
von Mises and uh I, I mean people from
the Uh, Austrian school, but, uh, I mean, where
would you place its origins?
I would even like to go even further back.
I think, um, if we like start looking at
like the first roots of it spreading in the
1920s, but, but before that there was like liberalism
and um, but it's sort of like after the
Great Depression, um, it kind of, yeah, like, Went
like or like it became unpopular, um to um
because like, John Maynard Keynes was like a big
person and um there was more government involvement to
like, get the US government er or like the
US as a country out of the Great Depression,
and um, I feel like, So after World War
I and in the 1920s, I feel like business
propaganda started evolving. Like there were like these think
tanks that formed by very big industrialists, um, like
the National Association of Manufacturers or the National Electric
Lights Association. Um, WHICH actually worked fun even earlier,
but back then they were like for government involvement
in the marketplace, like they were like for protectionism,
uh, building the Panama Canal and stuff like that.
But, um, yeah, after like the whole, um, New
Deal, uh, became a thing, um, they kind of,
Yeah, they kind of just, uh, started fearing for,
um, their profits. So, uh, they like these big
industrialists came together at these think tanks and started
investing insane amount of money into like propaganda to
stop government involvement in the marketplace, to stop, um,
The formation of unions to stop the strengthening of
the welfare state, um, because that was obviously eating
into their profits.
Yeah, it's really interesting to contrast, I don't know
if you read this book by the economist Clara
Mattei, The Capital Order, because she makes a connection
there between uh liberal policies like austerity measures and
the rise of fascism in Italy, for example, and
it's really interesting to contrast what happened in the
US with FDR and the New Deal, uh, how
they dealt with things. There in terms of creating
social security, for example, and how they dealt with
things in Italy which created even more social uprising
and led to people favoring the rise of fascism.
I mean, I don't know if you're familiar with
that part of history or
I'm not particularly like familiar with like um Italian
history to be completely honest, um, I need to
definitely like read more on that, um, I would
feel like, um. It does. I feel like we're
seeing it now in the US like, um. The
rise of like, but like not in response to
like the strengthening of uh government policies for workers,
but like, In response to the opposite actually, um,
but yeah, no, feel free to educate me on
what happened in Italy because I have not read
that book.
Uh, I, I mean, I, I of course I
will not get into details here because I have
done that interview with Clara Matte back in late
2022 and there are many things. That I don't
remember anymore, but I mean it's, she basically makes
an argument as to how back in the 1920s
and after the Great Depression in Italy, for example,
she also talks about England, but in Italy particularly
uh because they applied austerity measures. I mean, things
got even worse for the average person. And then
I mean as we've seen as we have been
seeing across Europe and even in the US as
well, I mean, uh with uh austerity measures after
the 2008 economic crisis, whenever that happens it seems
that people, uh, the average voter tends to. For
like authoritarian leaders, particularly from the right, and so
she establishes that link between favoring liberal policies in
that particular case, austerity measures and the rise of
fascism, and I mean I was mentioning that just
to try to establish. A contrast between what happened
in the US with FDR's policies versus what happened
uh in Italy and in other countries in Europe
after the Great Depression in terms of how people
of how you can deal with the same issue.
Uh, WITH, uh, through different kinds of, uh, policies
that lead to different results because we hear frequently
from, uh, neoliberals that, uh, I mean, the best
way or even the only way as we've seen
after the 2008 economic crisis to deal with a
crisis like that is to apply, uh, uh, austerity
measures and I mean that's not the only alternative
out there, I guess.
Yeah, 100%, um, but I feel like it's not
even that much of a contrast. I mean, like,
was it like, I feel like we're seeing. In
every case, when we apply austerity and like um,
take away workers' rights and the the means for
workers to just like have, That have like a
a nice life or just like a livable, have
a livable wage. Um, IF we take that away,
fascism rises like we're seeing it in the US
now, we're seeing it in the UK, we're seeing
it in Germany, we're seeing it everywhere. Um, BASICALLY
everywhere this is happening, um, instead of just like,
uh, we're like. Yeah, we're creating more and more
wealth inequality and we're seeing the rise of fascism
or like right wing policies or just like blaming.
Marginalized groups like immigrants, like, um, that is what
is rising, um, if we like keep, taking money
away from workers and um instead of just like
taxing billionaires.
Yeah, we'll get, we'll get into taxing billionaires later.
But I mean, another interesting thing is that how
the US economy boomed during the 50s and 60s
with very high marginal tax rates. I mean, I
think if I remember correctly, I think it was
over 300,000 or $400,000. I mean, People would be
taxed at a 90% tax rate. So I mean
for people who think that taxing the rich doesn't
work and it doesn't lead to economic growth, that's
a very good example of the opposite,
right? 100%, 100%. It just proves that high taxes
didn't kill capitalism because I feel like that is
always the argument. Um, HIGH taxes will kill capitalism
and everyone will be super unmotivated and nothing will
work anymore. Uh, BUT that's not true. In the
50s and 60s, business still um boomed. And but
the good thing was that people could afford housing
and um even though taxes on the rich were
like 90%, um, we did have high growth. We
had strong unions and all of that. Um, BUT
yeah, but then like, obviously like big industrialists didn't
want to pay 90% taxes, so they started all
these propaganda channels and um, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, I'm, I was just going to ask
you about propaganda, but just before let, let me,
let me just make this comment and then you
can comment on it. I mean, it's very interesting
how we frequently hear from, uh, capitalists, particularly, and
also, I mean, not just the neoliberals, but particularly
the neo. Liberals and here in Portugal we have
a neo-liberal party, the Liberal Initiative, and they make
the same sort of arguments about how if you
just let the market uh the uh the uh
the market without any kind of regulation. Work itself
out. I mean, uh, wages will rise, uh, workers'
rights will magically appear. I mean, it's a very
interesting narrative because if you look back in history,
the fact is that workers since. The very dawn
of capitalism and the industrialization had to organize themselves
and fight for every single right that they were
able to get and force the government to create
labor rights, right, because otherwise they wouldn't have got
them.
Yeah, 100%. Like labor rights were fought for by
unions and there were, there were like strikes. There
were fierce fights for the rights we have today,
like the 40 hour work week. It just happened
because like unions fought for it. It's not just
like that. It appeared out of thin air because
I feel like a lot of like um anti-regulation
advocates will be like, oh no, Ford were introduced.
That just because he saw workers would be more
profitable, but like, um, I mean, all of workers'
rights were fought for by unions and Ford was
like brutal against unions. Like he's like praised at
this as this like, oh yeah, he like, um,
helped the workers even though he didn't have to,
um, just like for profit, but that's actually not
the case historically.
Yeah, which is also very interesting because we also
hear very frequently that whenever someone accepts a new
job, whenever someone is hired, I mean, they have
the same power of negotiation that the boss has
that that that basically the owners of the company
have, but that's not. Actually true, I mean, because
we're talking about one single individual against one entire
corporation and that's why workers have actually to organize
to demand or to demand pay raises and rights
and so on,
100%, especially because like I mean. The leverage which
a corporation or like an employer has over an
employee is basically their whole livelihood, like their ability
to pay rent and not live on the street
and like feed their family. So that's like a
huge leverage compared to, oh, if I quit, then
I don't know, my coworker will have to do
a little bit more work. I mean, that's the
leverage you have over the company, realistically. And, um,
Yeah, the company will survive regardless. If you survive
regardless, that's, that's the big question.
Yeah, OK, so let's get into propaganda then, and
an interesting aspect of neoliberalism is that it just
doesn't try to convince people on the basis of
the merits of its arguments. I mean, throughout history,
it's been pushed, pushed through newspapers, even the education
system, TV programs, and other kinds of different propaganda
mediums, right?
100%, so, um, I don't think like that, um,
neoliberalism like is the best idea and I feel
like for a long time academics and so, didn't
think that either, but um it was just like,
Framed as an actual viable theory by um those
big think tanks we're talking about from the National
Association, National Association of Manufacturers to the National Electric
Lights Association to the Liberty League, Um, they all
like spent massive amounts of money to push this
ideology into schools. They like rewrote school books, they
pushed it onto TV, um, they pushed it into
even churches and Hollywood just with money, but, and
I mean it's no coincidence that up until today,
um, The richest people in the world all own
media companies, so Mark Zuckerberg owns Meta, Elon Musk
owns Twitter, Jeff Bezos owns The Washington Post. Murdoch
owns everything basically. So it is um. It is
really important, I feel like, to look at who
owns the media and who shapes the narrative and
If we look at who. Ended up shaping the
narrative. It is definitely the money that was poured
into by into, um, media, Hollywood, TV, churches, and
even schools by, um, corporate interests and like that
framed it as the American way.
Wait a minute, have you just said that X
slash Twitter is a media company? I thought it
was just a far right cesspool, no.
Very true, but it has become that because, um,
essentially, I mean, I mean, Twitter has changed quite
a bit since Elon took it over.
So just just a bit, just a bit. Yeah,
just a bit. Um, BUT yeah, I mean. It
is what it is, and um. Yeah, right wing
or like not even right wing, but like economically
conservative people have historically just been very, very good
at shaping the narrative. Also because shaping the narrative
costs money, like making educational videos costs money. I
mean, you know that. I know that running a
YouTube channel costs time and money. Um, RUNNING a
newspaper probably costs a little way, way more time
and money, um, or. Um, ANYTHING you need to
do. And most people are just like busy, um,
having to like work a normal job and don't
really have time or energy or money to spend
on shaping the narrative. Um, SO the people who
get to shape the narrative are mostly people who
already have the means. And usually if you have
the means and don't have to like spend your
time pursuing a normal job where you put work
in. Um, Yeah, you usually employ people to do
that for you and, um, can spend the time
shaping the narrative. So, um. That's only possible if
you exploit people a little bit, but, um, yeah.
So obviously people like who like who are who
own businesses have been more able to do that
than just like normal workers.
Yeah, tell us about this fellow named Edward L.
Bernays and uh his ideas about propaganda because he,
he, he seemed like a very interesting guy who
had a very low opinion of the general public's
intelligence, I guess.
Yeah, I, I, I, I wouldn't even say it,
put it that way. I feel like he was
actually quite even very smart at um. Reading the
um general population or at least how to like
shape their views and how to shape the narrative,
and I wouldn't necessarily even say that like he
was one of like, The people who came up
with this ideology, but he was like more of
like the father of propaganda, and he would use
it for like whoever would pay him the most.
Um, SO basically he was employed by big cigarette
companies who obviously had a lot of money to
spend on propaganda, so he helped them frame cigarettes
as women's liberation, as tortures of freedom. Um, AND
in politics, he got like hired by the National
Electric Lights Association to, um, help shape the narrative
that the American way and, um, low taxes for
corporations is in the best interest for everyone because,
um, growth will just trickle down. And, um, so
yeah, he, um, I feel like whoever paid him
would. We'll get his help or like we'll, yeah,
we'll be able to buy his services um and.
Yeah, he helped a lot of, like, a lot
of companies to like push a narrative that is
in many cases untrue, but also had very devastating
effects. For example, like in Guatemala, he was hired
by the United Fruit Company, which is the banana
company Chiquita, which we all know. I don't know,
are there Chiquita bananas in
Portugal? Yes, there are.
Yeah, same here. So, um. They're everywhere and uh
United Fruit Company had this big, um, had huge
banana plantations in Guatemala and was basically exploiting the
Guatemalan population and this American company wanted to obviously
continue exploiting the Guatemalan people who then eventually like
elected a Democratic socialist government and who were like,
oh no, we're gonna like enforce labor laws now
and um, we're not gonna let this American company
exploit our workers anymore. And essentially what United Fruit
then did was hire Eduard Bernays, who shaped this
narrative before Congress and before the American people that
Guatemala was a communist dictatorship now and a threat
and that it needed to be invaded by the
CIA. So yeah, the CIA planned a coup and
Guatemala was invaded and the government was overthrown. And
it plunged the country into decades of violence and
um, so yeah, definitely devastating um consequences, all in
the name to protect United Fruit's profits. Yeah.
Uh, uh, YEAH, yeah, I mean, the US has
a very rich history of invading or supporting coups
or, um, putting, uh, putting on economic embargoes on
countries that are more socialistic than they like and
then saying that socialism never works, but. When it's
to support their neoliberal ideology, they are willing to
give a lifeline to uh Ravier Mille in Argentina
because socialism never works, but of course neoliberal capitalism
or even libertarianism always works, right.
100%, 100%. Um, IT is, uh, it's pretty insane
how many countries they've invaded, um, in their backyard,
um, Latin America, uh, which is absolutely brutal. Also
how, how like I feel like. Sometimes even like
they have like this hatred towards like Latin America
if they decide to like do their own thing
or for example, like, um, yeah, back in the
70s, Chile was invaded. They invaded like Nicaragua, El
Salvador, like literally so many countries were cooped by
the US and I feel like even now how
they've shaped this narrative about like, Latin Americans or
like Mexicans wanting to go into the US. This
is obviously a bit off topic, but like, um,
calling them the immigrants, while they're like the Europeans
that like colonize the US are the original immigrants.
That's kind of wild how like in a few
100 years they've like managed to shape this narrative
and um. And yeah, also asserted this right to
intervene in other countries' economies economies and, um, push
this libertarian or neoliberal agenda.
Yeah, I mean, it's just very interesting. I, I
mean, I guess that uh that also plays into
what I was saying earlier when I mentioned Italian
fascism because very interestingly, Uh, even though the US
calls itself the, for example, when they invade countries
in the Middle East, freedom fighters, they tend to
be very big fans of right-wing dictators like Nohe
in Chile and other people like that, right? So
it's, it's a very interesting way of approaching international
politics.
100% and uh very worrying as well, like, um,
yeah, how Allende was overthrown by Pinochet just uh
by the year or like by uh supported coup
by uh. And then Pinochet was put in power.
Um, IT is actually very scary that the US
can just meddle that much.
Yeah, I, I guess if you haven't watched, you
should watch a video that's on YouTube from the
university. I want to say Cambridge. I'm not sure
if it was Oxford, but I think it was
Cambridge. Uh, THERE'S a student there who actually debated
Charlie Kirk a few months ago, and she put,
uh, the title of the video is something like
this house supports the decline of America. So I,
I think you should watch that check it out.
Yeah, I think that the name of the, uh,
girl is Tilly Middlehurst or something like that. So,
but yeah, you should definitely watch that because it's
a very interesting argument that she makes there. So,
I mean, uh, I, this is something that I
also talked about with Naomi Oreskes two years ago.
This tripod of Rhythm or what she calls in
the book the tripod of rhythm. I mean it's
a very interesting thing because when you start looking
at it, it sounds fine. I mean representative democracy,
why not civil and religious liberty, yeah, fine, but
then free enterprise, I mean free enterprise is supposedly
one of the three main tenets of American freedom.
Right.
Yeah, I feel like that's like they like um
in or like the National Association of Manufacturers like
invented this job for freedom as the centerpiece um
of their propaganda. Um, AND it basically is like
fabricated history. They kind of, I mean, obviously the,
um, Constitution in America features, um, democracy and freedom
of or like civil and religious liberty, but they
then they just like snuck in the free enterprise,
which is kind of hilarious, pretending that's what the
founding fathers wanted, um, which obviously is totally wrong.
They never really mentioned free enterprise and um. Yeah,
it's just a funny tool they invented, but that
really caught on because they literally like they spent
millions on a billboard campaign framing these three things
as the American way, and a lot of people
ended up believing it, that free enterprise is the
American way, which obviously it kind of isn't.
I, I mean, I guess that uh uh the
American right also loves to bring to the table
the founding fathers whenever they want to do some
revisionist history about what they supposedly supported, and they
do the same with some historical economists like Adam
Smith who actually together with Marx was very much
against the. REINDEERS or the reindeer class, but, but
they, they actually try to sort of whitewash what
Adam Smith said to make it a little bit
more neoliberal. So yeah,
they totally like cherry pick Adam Smith. It's like
wild. So they basically turned Adam Smith into like
this free market cheerleader. Um, AND like, I mean,
if you actually read The Wealth of Nations, um,
there's so many parts that are about like, um,
banking regulation, um, about, um, Monopolies about living wages
and um, for example, Amar T Yen, um, he's
uh he's quoted, uh, Adam Smith as actually being
a friend of the poor, because like if you
read Adam Smith uh like the Wealth of the
Nation, which I actually did go through a lot
of like, uh, this book, and he really is
a friend of the poor, they are like passages
in there that are like, um, very worker friendly,
very, um, very about like, Workers definitely deserve to
have a fair share of their work. Um, WE
need to like adequately house, clothe and uh feed
everyone because no society can flourish, to actually quote
him, um, in a way like uh workers are
treated poorly. Um. So yeah, but neoliberals and libertarians
obviously like to cherry pick Adam Smith and um.
Yeah, they basically totally ignore Smith's warnings on monopolies
and everything that is that might be not as
libertarian or liberal.
I mean, look, Anna, they would definitely say that
your Economic diet is very unbalanced because you're definitely
a radical lefty who just reads uh Marx and
people like that. I mean, you definitely need more
of von Mises, Hayek, Friedman, and even a little
bit of, of Thomas Sowell in your diet because
uh I mean, otherwise you're just. Very biased, right.
Yeah,
the funny thing is that I haven't even read
Marx, to be honest, also because it's really long,
so I'm like, hm yeah, thanks but no thanks,
but I feel like just reading Adam Smith is
enough to like kind of support left wing politics
if you actually read him carefully and not for
example like George Stigler's edited version because that's what
happened, that like um corporate think tanks um. Decided
to fund, um, economists at the Chicago school, um,
so Chicago University, and they funded George Stigler and
Mises and Hayek to write these books, um, and
in the case of George Stigler, um, basically editing
Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nation into like some
sort of like, Free market, um, bible, but yeah,
by the, by the way, just before we get
into the um. What happened after the so-called post-war
consensus and the rise of neoliberal capitalism. Uh, LET'S
talk a little bit about, uh, Keynesianism. I mean,
uh, in your understanding, why do you think that
Keynesianism was so popular after World War II and
there was this sort of post-war consensus around it?
Well, because like it obviously pulled, um, the American
economy and like general economy out of the Great
Depression, which, um, just like liberate like Hoover, which
was like the president, um, before FDR had obviously
failed to do because he was quite a market
fundamentalist and was like, oh, the free market, we'll
just sort it out. Obviously it didn't. And, um,
then FDR was super beloved, um, he was re-elected
many times and um. And just proved that like
state intervention stabilized these boom and bust business cycles.
Um, ALSO, people could afford houses in the 50s,
so normal workers could completely afford to buy a
house after working for two or three years. Um,
AND afford the down payment, which looking at today's
economy is just not possible in my generation. Almost
no one buys a house. Um, SO unless they
it's the same here, I have to
tell you, yeah, unless they inherit money from their
parents. So, um, I mean, there's obviously a couple
of exceptions, um, those people working in banking or
stuff like that, but as like a normal nurse.
You or teacher or just like a normal job,
you can't really afford a house. But back then,
that was not the case. Back then, nurses, teachers,
postmen could afford houses, which obviously, um, proves the
success of Keynesianism and the post-war consensus and, um,
also because government made it possible. For example, in,
uh, the UK, um, people were supported to, um.
Buy uh houses, they could like buy these cheap,
um, what were they called again, um. In London,
these. Of the, of the, in the bor, I
don't remember the exact word, but
they but but there, there was more social housing
in the UK in
the and people wanted to buy these social houses,
so um. Yeah, the council houses, that's the name.
Yeah, um, so they would buy, um, these up,
um. And yeah, that that that was killed by
Thatcher.
Uh I, I mean, I guess, I guess that
the only time you hear right wing people uh
talking good about the 50s is when they say
or they claim that women have better lives in
the 50s because I, I, I, I mean, of
course, of course. Uh, WHEN they were at home
and when there were no laws against marital rape
and when they couldn't have their own credit card
and when they couldn't go to university, of course,
just because they were their only purpose was to
have children and raise them and take care of
their husbands, uh, they were happier, of course.
Yeah, I mean, I feel like that is like
a really interesting actually point to talk about because
um, Back then it was possible for a family
to survive on a single income. And now obviously
like there's still a lot of housework or like
household chores, uh, is still being done by women,
only that women now also work full time. So
one does have to say it is a lot
more stressful, um, because you just like need to
um. Incomes and I feel like what conservatives like
to simplify this argument by like being like, oh
yeah, women had better back then because they didn't
have to like hold a job and like all
they had to do is like take care of
the kids, disregarding obviously all of the facts that
women have no rights and stuff like that. And
obviously it was more chill as a whole family
to be able to survive on a single income.
Um, BECAUSE obviously household chores do take up a
lot of time, like, um, I'm single, I have
to make money. I have to kind of like
make my own laundry, I have to like do
everything and I don't even have kids. Um, SO
just having like a second person around to take
care of all of the housework would be fucking
amazing. Um, OR also if I didn't have to
make money and just like, um, take care of
the house. In, in a world like I think
that could be chill, but, um, obviously I still
want all the rights, um, that, um, women have
in. Uh, THE 21st century and um I feel
like conservatives like to conflate, um, this women had
it better back then because they didn't have to
work, um. Yeah, with just like the economic reality
of like women today have to do both, kind
of.
Yeah, I, I, I guess we can go back
to that when we talk about your first video
on neoliberalism, but I mean, what happened then in
the 70s because the 70s was a very interesting
period in terms of the developments, the political and
economic developments that happened there because suddenly, the, I
mean Keynesianism was not, was no longer a consensual
and then there was the rise of Uh, very
nice political figures like Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher,
and I mean, people that we all love, right?
So, uh, I mean, what happened then?
Yeah, I mean, I feel like all of the
propaganda before opened the door for neoliberal alternatives, but
one does have to say that um. It took
two big economic shocks or like um problems um
that um essentially really opened the door for these
neoliberal alternatives and the people that were groomed to
take over them like Thatcher and Reagan. Um, ONE
is like stagflation, which was like high inflation plus
high unemployment, um, while also having a stagnating, uh,
like stagnating economic growth. Um, SO that was obviously
bad. And um that happened because of, for example,
the oil shocks in the Middle East, um, the
fiscal crisis of the state, and, um, that kind
of opened the door for, um, for, yeah, economically
right wing people to be like, We told you
all along this doesn't work. Here's Margaret Thatcher and
Ronald Reagan, who are going to fix it now
and proving that it's about like the individual entrepreneur.
Um, IF you, um, don't hustle hard enough, you
don't deserve to eat, basically. So, um, Yeah, just
kind of blaming it on individuals and obviously big
economic shocks like the oil crisis should definitely not
be blamed on individuals.
Of course not. And I mean, do you think
that there's any evidence at all to support the
argument the neoliberals make that the economic crisis that
happened in the 70s were due to Uh, Keynesian
or left wing economic policy.
No, I, I don't think anything supports that if
you actually look at the facts, um, what the
spending, um, of things was, um, so welfare historically,
like the amount we have spent on welfare has
never been that high that we could say this,
this was like, The problem or because that's the
argument that right wing people like to make. Oh,
financing healthcare and welfare for the weaker parts of
the population is what is like hurting the economy.
Actually, it's like insane government contracts. Like military contracts,
the amount of like, um, we're spending on fucking
weapons, um, fighting wars, um, that don't actually need
to be fought like just like looking at the
amount of money that is being sent to Israel,
um, by all kinds of like Western nations, but
mostly by America and then under their pressure by
all of the other, um. Western countries, um, is
mind boggling and, um, there's also some really interesting
like analysis about like which politicians in the US
own stocks to which weapons manufacturers and in like
how much money from like, um, stock gains they've
made on that. So, um, I don't think ever
that the argument that oh, if we spent less
on welfare. We'd be like in a better state.
No, if we spent less on foreign wars that
we literally shouldn't be fighting and also that probably
shouldn't even exist because like looking at all the
wars that happened in like the last 50 years,
um, they like Iraq, Iran, what like Israel, um.
Kind of all, um, proxy wars that the US
or the West should have nothing, uh, to do
with it and that did more harm than good
for everyone everywhere.
Yeah, it's like war spending and then the neoliberals
also do not tend to see, uh, do not
tend to be very much against subsidies for or
or corporate subsidies and subsidies for the rich because
I mean it's kind of like they don't tend,
they say they don't like socialism, but they like
socialism for the rich. And and capitalism slash neoliberalism
for the poor. Yeah,
100%. It's socialism for the rich and that's like
what I was saying earlier on, um, about like
elites just like handing out super big government contracts
to their homies essentially or like they're being like
a revolving door effect of people in power, like
switching between political power and like corporate power and
um. Yeah, just like there's like this one circle,
kind of, um, where it's very easy to stay
rich because like, because you have all these connections
and that network that is very socialist amongst themselves,
um, but yeah, capitalism for the poor, socialism for
the rich is a very nice way to put
it.
Yeah, so tell us about this guy. I mean,
we've, I've only alluded to him, but let's talk
about him directly now. Tell us about Milton Friedman.
I mean, what does he represent in the history
of neoliberalism and was he a real academic or,
I mean, how did he come up with his
ideas and spread them?
Mhm, I would say he's definitely like the PR
face of neoliberalism, um, so his academic, like he
likes to paint himself as an academic, but the
fact is that, um, Universities and um like he
was like, fed by um think tanks like the
National Asstitution of Manufacturers or um, and all of
these other uh corporate think tanks because they needed
like, A book that would, um. Explain to the
um. Normal man, um, that capitalism and freedom are
inextricably linked because obviously they had Hayek, um, which,
um, he had written the book, uh, The Road
to Serfdom, but it was like a little bit
more nuanced and it was quite an academic book
as well, um, about, um, yeah, market, market freedom
and, uh, democracy being linked. Um, BUT it was
kind of hard for like the common man to
understand. So obviously like these think tanks, um, who
were headed by people like Pew or Luno, um,
they needed a book that would be like more
straight to the point and like. Kind of a
bestseller. So, um, they essentially, um, poured loads of
money into the University of Chicago, where Milton Friedman
got then hired and, uh, he was funded to
write Capitalism and Freedom, um, which is a book
that he based on his lectures that were also
funded by these think tanks. Um, AND yeah, he
went on, he was like less of an academic,
like he liked to like. Talk in like catchy
one-liners um and was like kind of a showman,
he liked going on TV and like on podcasts
and, um, he basically wherever he went, he would
er advocate for deregulation, small government and how like
capitalism and freedom were linked and that we needed
them.
He, he, he liked to go on TV and
podcasts. Oh my God, are you talking about the
20 twenties or?
No, but like on radio shows, not podcasts, probably
they were.
Yeah, no, no, I, I mean, I was just
kidding, but, but I, I was, I, I, I
mean my joke, uh, I mean it was, uh,
like I, I meant two different kinds of things.
Uh, IT was a joke because of course podcasts
didn't exist back then, but also because that's what
some people do nowadays of the same kind of
ideology.
Yeah, 100%. I mean, um, not like, um, there's
many people like, um, what, what, what's his name,
like, for example, Charlie Kye, but also, um, What
what are the names of this, this right wing
psychologist,
Jordan Peterson.
Yeah, those, for example, or like who who basically
are kind of kind of the same, he like
paints himself as an academic, but um, obviously it's
more of a showman, and yeah, Milton Friedman was
like kind of like the earlier version of it,
but like a bit more. Even academic, I mean,
um, and yeah, he er would go on TV
shows and say that the world runs on greed.
Um, THERE'S actually this clip you can watch on
YouTube where he like says that on the, um,
Donahue show, er, which was like a very big
TV show back in the day. Um, BUT yeah,
he basically totally ignores, um, the comparative and public
achievements, um, like NAS like NASA, for example, or
the invention of the internet, or literally every, every
invention was funded by public money going to universities.
Like this iPhone would not be possible without, um,
So much public state money going into universities to
fund actual academic research, but then capitalists like to
be like to paint less. This iPhone wouldn't exist
without capitalism, um, which is just not. Yeah,
yeah, I was just going to say that that's
really outrageous of you. So you are against neoliberal
capitalism and you want an iPhone. You're a hypocrite.
So some people, like I feel like someone commented
that on the like one of my videos about
like owning a MacBook but like being anti-capitalist and
um, I mean we all need tools and if
I buy a Microsoft computer, it's gonna be probably
manufactured in the same way as an Apple computer
and that is. Something that conservatives love to point
out.
No, you know, one of the funniest memories I
have from university is that this one time I
was watching on my computer a Che Guevara movie
and one of my friends who was very much
against. Communism, Marxism, socialism, and so on, uh, said,
oh, you're watching that. DO you know that, uh,
if, if it wasn't for capitalism, you wouldn't have
that computer.
A classic, a classic. But yeah, um. But yeah,
that's just the very simple kind of argument that
Friedman would probably also have made.
Yeah, but that's when I like to reply, yeah,
but if it wasn't for the state, he wouldn't
have the internet.
100%, 100%.
Um, OK, so I, I, I mean this several
things that I want to talk about there in
regards to Milton Friedman. I mean, one very interesting
thing is that these guys, I mean, neo-liberals, right-wing
conservatives, and so on are always talking about because
they like to turn everything into a market, they
like to talk about the Marketplace of ideas, but,
uh, interestingly enough, it doesn't seem that Milton Friedman
was very interested in, uh, putting his ideas out
in the marketplace of ideas and see which ideas
would win because it was funded by think tanks
and rich people and they didn't seem very interested
in, uh, publishing academically and being peer reviewed, so.
Yeah, 100%, like, uh, in the actual marketplace of
ideas, um, which is also like a very, a
big euphemism, I think, but like we use it
nowadays, so, um. Yeah, um, His, his book and
like the economists that came before him like Hayek,
um, and Van Mises, their, their ideas failed in
the marketplace of ideas. They only gained traction once
they like had access, um, to this immense amount
of, uh, funding provided by big industrialists, so. Without
the industrialists, their ideas would probably have never prevailed.
And, um, if they hadn't bought the whole faculty
at like, um, the University of Chicago, all of
these ideas probably wouldn't really have been published because
they wouldn't have gotten any funding. Um, AND yeah,
Friedman kind of forgets to mention, um. That but
or like that that his ideas did not win
because they were the best, but because they were
like their promotion and marketing marketing was funded by,
uh, these, uh, big industrialists. But yeah, he, I
mean, even in his book, he acknowledges, um, how
much support and funding he got from them, but
he kind of does not. Get like you can't
like see how that could be problematic, which is
wild to me.
Yeah, it's very interesting and also the other thing
you mentioned, this idea of greed as the primary
human motivation. I mean, it's always interesting. Just the
other day I was talking with and I released
an interview with Richard Wolff. I don't know if
you're aware of him, he's a Marxist economist from
the US and Uh, we were talking about how,
uh, it's very interesting that many times we hear
from capitalists that capitalism. Um, GOES, um, I mean,
capitalism is in accordance with our human nature, but
then you look back and capitalism is like 300
years old and we as Homo sapiens are like
200,000, 300,000. I mean, a study came out recently
that perhaps we are 1 million years old, so
I mean, it's, it's a very It, it, it's
like an extraordinary claim to make that what's been
around for the past 300 years is more in
accordance to human nature than other systems that we
have, right?
Yeah, I mean, uh, there's actually two points I
want to touch upon, uh, from what you said
right now. One is like, Um, OK, so we
like for a very long time we did feudalism,
um, which basically is not very different from capitalism
except that it's not about land, but about like
the means of production just like with as time
has gone on, like machines and like working capital
has just like become as important as owning the
land. So I feel like capitalism is just like
feudalism 2.00 at this point. And also about like,
um, talking about capitalism is human nature. I will
like greed is human nature in that sense. Um,
I don't think, uh, that at all. Actually, um,
I I did a psychology, um, in my bachelor's
degree and I was actually like I I never
went into the field because then I focused on
like statistics and um going into finance. But um,
what I really like. Then was developmental psychology, which
is like the, which is like far off from
what I'm doing today, but it's about like the
psychology of babies. And, um, what, what like just
like doing experiments on babies, and there's like so
many experiments where, um, literally a couple months old
babies, um, Are like tested on altruism uh and
um for example, there's one experiment where like uh,
I feel like the scientists, like the the baby
sees how a door works, but it would have
to like make an effort to like go to
the door. Um, SO going to the door would
be, or if it didn't need to, would obviously
be like altruistic. And then like the baby gets
shown how the door works, and then, um, it
it will just sit in a room and then
like a a scientist will just like try to
get through the door and fail all the time,
just like walking the door and just like not
being able to go through the door. Uh, THE
baby will always get up and like help him
open the door. So, um,
yeah, and there's also that experiment where they show
babies, uh, different geometric figures, and there's, for example,
a triangle, a square, and a rectangle, and one
of the figures is going up a hill and
one of them, uh, uh, helps it go up
the hill and the other blocks his its progress
and the baby. Tend to prefer the more prosocial,
uh, geometric figure. I mean, the one that helps
instead of hindering the, the progress.
100% and there's like even more like I feel
like a lot of human psychologists or like, especially
like from the humanitarian psychology branch. I, to be
honest, I'm a big critique of psychology at this
point because I feel like there's a lot of
like, um, Fundamental statistics that are or like the
statistical fundamentals behind a lot of experiments are kind
of skewed. But, um, I do very much believe
in, uh, the sentiments of like, um, Abraham Maslow
or Carl Rogers who say that deep down, humans
want to be good. I mean, no one wakes
up and is like, I want to be evil.
Like we all want to be good people like.
I just know it for myself like when I
when I feel like I've done something wrong, I,
I feel horrible but like when I like I
cos I want to do like something right or
like I want to be a good person and
I feel like we all want to be a
good person, but at the same time we we
get like socialized in a way that says like,
no, you have to fight for yourself. You, you
have to look out for yourself because no one
else will. Bullshit, if we all looked at looked
out more for like. The people that surround us,
instead of being like so focused, like being taught
to be so focused on our individual well-being, um,
I feel like that would change society a lot
and I feel like that's a narrative that we
need to like break up.
Uh, I mean, there's just so many sources of
evidence even from anthropology that, uh, that, uh, that
debunk the idea that greed is our primary motivation
as humans. I mean, even in traditional societies like
hunter-gatherers, horticulturalists, I mean, uh, in general, not all
of those societies it. Depends a little bit on
their ecological context, and I talked about this with
anthropologists on the show already, but, mm, most of
them tend to be more egalitarian, even gender egalitarian.
And they share the meat they get when they
go out hunting, and I mean they don't tend
to like people who are leaders and become very
authoritarian and stuff like that, and there's cooperative breeding,
for example, the idea that the nuclear family. IS
the traditional sort of social organization and it's like
an ancient thing. I mean, it's not in more
traditional societies, people have cooperative breeding and there's also
evidence of that, uh, uh, in, in archaeology, for
example. So, I, I mean, I don't think they're.
That this argument of greed being the primary human
motivation holds much water unless you're like, uh, a
fan of Ayn Rand or something like that.
Yeah, Ayn Rand, she's a fucking broken theory, man,
what she's got going on. But yeah, no, I
totally agree with you, like us humans would have
never like. Um, GOTTEN as far as like we
got like from an evolutionary perspective, if we hadn't
like lived in groups and being like and worked
as a collective, I mean like a single human
just like out in nature will die, but like
as a group, we survive. Um, WE'RE not like,
for example, like there's animals like. Um, OCTOPI, octopi,
octopuses, octo
octopi, octopi, maybe, I don't know.
I don't know, but the plural of octopuses, the
plural of octopus, um, anyways. They can live on
their own, they like learn everything on their own.
Actually the other day I saw like this cool
movie of like an octopus and um basically they
like have everything like programmed into them and they
just, they like the the mom octopus dies and
then like the while laying the eggs and then
like. Uh, A couple of weeks later, the, the
octopus egg hatches and, uh, it has to learn
everything themselves, uh, um, like for itself basically. While
we as a human species, a baby doesn't learn
shit for itself. Like we need like at least
15. 15 years of upbringing, um, or like, and
like for at least the 1st 5 years, we
need to be like fed, um, by someone else,
um, because we're just like not able to like
find our own food for the first couple of
years. Um, LET alone everything, all the other challenges
that human life poses, so we're definitely like, we'd
be nowhere, um, if everyone just looked out for
themselves.
But aren't aren't we just like lobsters or I've
heard that from someone.
I, I don't know how lobsters, do lobsters live
in fat?
Uh OH, I thought you had heard that thing
from Jordan Peterson. Comparing lobsters to humans and how
lobsters are very hierarchical and then he makes he
makes a point of saying that lobsters, I mean
in terms of, um, like evolutionary history, lobsters are
very ancient and so hierarchy is very ancient and
so hierarchy is natural also in human society.
Do lobsters even live in groups?
Uh, LOOK, I, I don't know. I, I, I
don't know. The, the only thing I know is
that kind of BS argument. I, I, I, I
think, I think it was debunked by people who
actually study lobsters, but, but I don't, I don't
remember exactly. What they replied to Jordan Peterson's argument.
I just find it funny,
hilarious, and I'll definitely be looking up this lobster
theory because I just feel like it's great just
like having that for a conversation. Just um, you've
definitely piqued my interest there.
Yeah, I mean, and look, if we're going for
like a human, uh, animal predecessors and justifying. Uh,
SO, uh, different kinds of social organization based on
the behavior of non-human animals, then I mean we
could cite, uh, bonobos,
monkeys.
I mean, bonobos tend to be a very fun
bunch, of course they are also a little bit
violent, but they try to, uh, they tend to
solve.
These are the violent ones and bonobos are like
the, the caring ones.
Uh, YES, that, that, that's not exactly. True, uh,
but I had that conversation, I think 2 years
ago with an anthropologist that, that, uh, that strict
division is not, is not exactly true, but for
example, bonobos tend to solve many social conflicts with
sex, so.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's what I've heard too. Like,
and chimpanzees fight it out, like. I, I'm not
sure, but,
uh, but yeah, I, I mean, just to say
that if you want to go for non-human animals,
uh, uh, sources of evidence, then. You can make
many different kinds of arguments with different animals or
different species.
I feel like we should stick to monkeys, like
if,
if, at least, at least they're, at least they're
closer to us, right?
Yeah, closer than lobsters.
OK, so, OK, so I, I mean, you're from
the United Kingdom. Uh, WHAT do you think about
Margaret Thatcher? I mean, What were the sort of
political, economic, and social consequences of the adoption of
neoliberal policies and some of her very uh eloquent,
um, takes, like, for example, saying that there's no
such a thing as society, there's only individuals, so
what do you make of that?
Um, SO, um, first of all, I'm half German,
half English. So, um, but we can see both,
we can see both, um, in both countries, we
can, we can, um, see, um, that massive growth
of individualism, but I'll stick with Margaret Thatcher about
her point about like, um, Being that there's no
there's no society, there's just family, basically like hammering
down that nuclear family as like, oh yeah, we
just need to make sure the survival of the
family and greed is good as like for the
family and um. Yeah, that that's just wild, but
then I feel like Margaret Thatcher is like this
really interesting persona, um. So basically like she, how
she was like put in place um or like
a lot of people think of Margaret because like
Margaret Thatcher was like the daughter of a grocer,
so like her her dad owned like a um
very small little supermarket, um, I think. So, um,
it might be some other kind of shop. I'm
unsure about the kind of shop her dad owned,
but a shopkeeper, like, and it was not a
big chain, so, um, so, so there's like, she
was like part of that petit bourgeois class where
like uh not like a normal worker cos I
feel like that's really interesting, um. Like the petite
bourgeois class is like definitely very different from like
the big capitalist class. um, BUT they always like,
they don't want to identify with like normal workers,
um, even though the the amount of money they
earn is obviously like a lot nearer the to
like normal worker than like, for example, the owner
of Tesco or whatnot, um. But, um, yeah, I
feel like she was like. A lot of people
from working class or from like that petty bourgeois
background who are like shopkeepers or like just like
middle like lower middle class people identified with her.
So I feel like that was like a very
very smart move. By conservatives back in the day
to like put someone like her, not like a
Tesco owner, um, in charge or like not like
for example, Rishi Sunak, um, who comes from a
super wealthy background, um, but like Margaret Thatcher, so
she was able to like convince. People from like
lower classes to be like oh yeah, entrepreneurship and
like the individual and um, just like the market's
not going to solve shit for you, er sorry,
government's not gonna solve shit for you, it's all
about like the market because like, she came from
that background of her father being like a shopkeeper
and she had like, helped like her all of
her teenage years she had helped her in the
shops so she kind of like, knew what it
was about, um, but could also very much assimilate
to that worker background and, uh, kind of made
it a lot more credible for like ordinary people
to like identify with her, while at the same
time pushing this corporate agenda.
Yeah, uh, and I mean one interesting thing and
we, you mentioned briefly earlier, the trickle-down economics. One
very interesting thing is that we hear from neoliberals
that trickle-down economics actually works, but then we look
at actual data from, for example, the US and
the past 40, 50 years and uh wages seem
to be stagnant. Um, AND I mean when you
compare the wages for CEOs versus the average worker,
they are, the difference is much bigger now, much,
much bigger now than it was in, for example,
the 50s and the 60s. So, I mean, do
you think that there's good enough evidence for us
to say that neoliberalism causes wealth inequality or?
I would definitely um I mean trickle down economics
or like um how like right or like conservative
um like to call it supply side economics. um,
THAT'S what they like to call it. Um, I
definitely like there's been loads of research, for example,
like uh there's like these really famous researchers that
were like really famous, like as famous as you
can get as like an academic, but like, um.
Like Hopper and Lindbergh and they like did a
lot of like empirical work on like, um, how
actually trickle-down economics doesn't work and uh it's just
like uh like, it doesn't even grow the economy
like it it like all it does is just
like benefit the rich. um, BUT obviously the rich
have a lot more money to like spend on
propaganda that like supply side economics work. Um, AND
yeah, all that has happened just like the rise
of, of inequality where like, for example, CEO pay,
um, or like, um, people in very high positions
or like shareholders, like, it's like, let's look at
CEOs as like an example. Their pay went like
from 20 times the amount of like a worker
would earn a year, uh, in 1965, which is
20 times, uh, the amount of like. From a
worker, like it's still a lot more like, um,
but now in 2022, like CEOs make 344 times
as much as, um, workers, which is just like
you can't even like. Imagine the amount of how
much richer that is, um, and we are seeing
that wealth is getting more and more and more
concentrated, uh, in the top 1%, um. And probably
like in in smaller percent, um, while everyone else
is getting squeezed out. There's so many people or
like, um, where it like renting, uh, you're like
not even buying a house, but renting, like it's
it's getting so expensive. The like the cost of
living crisis is happening in every country from the
US to the UK to Germany to probably also
in Portugal. Um, SO, um. Everyone is experiencing this,
this, um, cost of living crisis, while at the
same time, like we're probably gonna like see the
1st 1 trillionaire being made, um, in the next
couple of years. So that is just crazy.
Well, I mean, perhaps that will be humanity's biggest
achievement in the 21st century. I don't know, creating
the first trillionaire,
a trillionaire. Also the big issue like just like
a complete asshole will like become the first trillionaire
like.
Yeah, I guess so because I think we, we
both, we both know who's the person that's most
likely to become the first trillionaire and he's very
much an asshole.
Yeah, even like, I mean, either Elon Musk or
Jeff Bezos like have like a great moral track
record.
Yeah, but, but it, it's interesting because er as
you said briefly there, it's not like in the
50s and 60s, particularly in the US, rich people
being taxed at 90%, they were poor. I mean,
they still had lots. Of money, lots and lots
of money, because, for example, uh, if someone from
the left, I don't know, in the US, let's
say someone like Sam Seder, who actually makes that
kind of argument goes on the right-wing podcast. And
suggests that we should go back to taxing the
rich at 90%. The, uh, I, I mean the
right wingers go crazy. It's like, oh my God,
communism, socialism, fascism. I mean, words don't mean anything
anymore because I mean I'm making this. Joke because
there's actually a compilation video of Donald Trump calling
the Democrats and Kamala Harris Nazi, Nazis, Marxists, fascists,
socialists, communists, so I guess that words don't have
any meaning anymore. But, but I, but I mean,
but I mean my point is if people are
still fucking rich, right?
Yeah, people would still be fucking rich, like take
away 90% of like uh Elon Musk's wealth, um.
Yeah, he would still completely be able to afford
all of this crazy lifestyle and everything that he
wanted to do. And um, yeah, just. And that's
not, it's just like, that would be like a
90% wealth tax, and you would still be completely
fine.
Yeah, I, I mean, but don't you think that,
I mean, we should care about meritocracy and obviously
CEOs. Company owners and other people like that, of
course, they work much harder than the average worker
and they deserve to earn 1 million% more than
the average worker and stuff like that. I mean,
don't you think that we should be a little
more, a little bit more empathetic towards the hardworking.
Uh, BILLIONAIRES, CEOs, and other people like that.
Yeah, I feel like if meritocracy actually worked, but
the truth is that most like people inherit their
their companies and um, the like the percentage of
people who like actually like come from a poor
background and like sort of make it for themselves
is is abysmal and um. All of the richest
men that we were just talking about, like come
from quite rich backgrounds, got the capital from their
parents, and, um, yeah, I mean, the thing is,
meritocracy, like if we really would want to do.
THAT like everyone would have to start from zero
and we'd have to like introduce, uh, inheritance tax,
taxing all inheritance so everyone could start from zero.
BUT that's just not the case. So, um. I
feel like we just shouldn't be talking about meritocracy
unless we like if we wanted meritocracy, we'd first
have to do that and then we could like
talk about like if it would be fair that
like people who like found companies um and while
exploiting people's labor somehow, um, because they own means
of production, um, should be able to earn more.
We can have that conversation, um, yeah, as soon
as everyone starts from zero.
Beyond the means of production, you're clearly a Marxist,
come on. Only only Marxists stock like.
Um, NO, but I feel like it, it, it
doesn't totally make sense. Like, I mean, You don't
have to be a Marxist to like understand that
like that owning the means of production is, um,
is the way to like exploit people nowadays and
the only way to actually become wealthy. You cannot
become wealthy without owning either stocks by being a
CEO or um. Owning your own company, you can't
buy like hard work in the bakery without owning
the bakery, you cannot become rich.
Uh, RIGHT, so let's talk about your first video
on neoliberalism where you focus on the topic of
self-improvement. So, what, in your understanding, what is the
link between neoliberalism and the promotion of self-improvement?
Um, SO yeah, I feel like a lot of
time when we talk about neoliberalism, we just like
talk about economics and like, but I feel like
it was for me, it was very important and
like it's very unaccessible as well to people to
only talk about economics and the broader economy and
whatnot, um, because that's actually, I mean, while we
experience it and while we experience its its effects,
it's not something that we think, Or like that
way it it's that easy to think about and
doesn't like apply to ourselves so much but I
feel like probably most people who like live nowadays
or especially like for example like um people that
are you're my age um, will always like hear
about that like about self improvement and I feel
like a lot of like, People don't read fiction
anymore. People always like, or like a lot of
people read like nonfiction books like Atomic Habits or,
um, productivity productivity books or whatnot, like these are
like, Had a huge like impact because people have
realized that like, Or like not because people have
realized but because like this narrative is sold that
like if you want to make it in the
world you have to like be your best self
and like a lot like it's all about you
as an individual. So we've obviously all become like,
kind of obsessed with this like um notion of
self improvement and kind of like, Made ourselves into
like a little entrepreneur of the self. That's what
the philosopher Byung Chouhan calls it. Um, HE writes
a lot about like neoliberalism and like neoliberal philosophy,
like because it it's not just about economic life.
So, um, It what what has happened is that
people more and more feel. Um, PERSONALLY responsible for
actual systemic issues, um, and put that pressure of
the market logic to itself. And that market logic
has expanded into all areas of life. Um, SO,
uh, we now think of, uh, the marketplace of
ideas, but not even just that, like we, it
has applied to dating, um, like, uh, the dating
market or, um, to friendships, to identity. Um, WE'VE
all become like, including myself, like becoming obsessed with
like the gym and our appearance and how, um,
like with, with status and we more and more
think of, for example, like friendships is like we're,
As commodities, I feel like we've commodified everything. Um,
PEOPLE like now pick their friend circle of like,
oh, if I hang out with these people, um,
or like if I network, like that will help
my career or stuff like that. People like socialize
at networking events nowadays and not necessarily just like
hang out with their friends, um, which I personally
feel is a lot healthier. Um, BUT yeah, I
feel like this market logic is like. Apply it
is being applied to everything and that's actually really
sad and also, it makes us feel lonely if
like we constantly have to like strive. To be
better, um, we kind of lose touch with like.
Just like not being so self-improvement or re-entered, like
we we like this self-improvement orientation kind of like
takes over and and, yeah, it it it makes
us like all into like individuals and chasing individual
success and I feel like it it's a big
part of um what is fueling the loneliness crisis
that we're experiencing right now.
Yeah, I, I mean, I would like to run
through you a theory that I have. I, I
actually someday I have to run this through, um,
also an economist to hear their ideas, but I
mean it doesn't seem coincidental to me that. Uh,
THE rise of the hustle, uh, the rise of
hustle culture, the rise of hustle bros on the
internet, and then, because, I mean, you mentioned there
briefly, briefly the How they try to turn everything
into a market, even dating and mating, and so
I would also include the rise of things like
the manosphere there. Uh, I, I don't think, uh,
it's coincidental that that happened. It Through, through the
2010s and now in the 2020s after the 2008
economic crisis and the fallout of that because, I
mean, it seems to me that those sort of
ideas, oh you can make it yourself, you can
become an entrepreneur, take these 21 steps, and you
will become rich in 90 days would be very
appealing. To a generation of people and even particularly
more so young men, uh, who tend to isolate
themselves more than women, I guess, um, who have
been economically and politically disenfranchised. I mean, people have
fewer econo uh fewer job opportunities, fewer economic opportunities.
I mean, the job market is a complete mess
with the gig economy and, uh, precarious jobs and
stuff like that and the fact that people can
no longer buyer. Buy a house and many people
are still living in their late 20s and 30s
with their parents and so on. So, I mean,
if people, uh, I guess that what made those
kinds of ideas very appealing were the economic and
so uh and particularly more so the economic circumstances
that very many young people found themselves in. I
mean, what do you think about that?
100%, um, I feel like we're, um, We're seeing
that in every aspect actually of, of culture, um,
um, so the, um, Obvious Obviously like people are
becoming desperate and for example I feel like uh
for example especially like, men who still have like
um like have forgotten this um, Or grew up
with this notion of like, yeah, we need to
provide for a family one time but like, one
day, but like it it's obviously impossible at this
point um to provide for a family with a
single income. So basically what's been happening is like,
and that it's always um been a thing that
people become fiscally more irresponsible, the more desperate they
are. For example, it's like, if it's impossible to
buy a house, um. Or like every time that
like an economic recession has happened, people have gambled
more. Um, OR people have also there's like this
famous lipstick tax that like, um, expensive lipsticks have
all like their sales have always gone up, like
during a recession. So, um, and we're seeing that
for example, with labubus, um, or day trading, which
is like gambling. Lap is also a form of
gambling at this point, like you're buying something and
hoping like you pull something with value.
By the way, sorry for interrupting, but I have
to say this here in Portugal, uh, until recently,
and it's still sort of an ongoing problem, we,
we've been having such a Bad problem with older
people, people who are already retired, spending tons of
their money on gambling, that the government is now
regulating that activity, so,
yeah, but that that's, that's important that like gambling
gets regulated, but I feel like the more and
more, um like, Kind of bleak the economic situation
becomes, the more people feel like, oh, like, or
like go to like desperate measures like, Day trading,
like if we like look at like Google uh
analytics, if we like type in day trading, how
many people nowadays want to learn day trading and
become rich quick, um, has gone up like by
an insane amount. Um, ALSO, for example, like my
um friend Gary Stevenson, he's like sort of a
big YouTuber, um, but he like tells me that
like all people asking that the question he gets
the most is like how to trade, even though
he talks about like wealth inequality on this channel.
But like,
oh, Gary Stevenson, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh yeah,
yeah, I follow his channel, yeah.
Yeah, um, so basically all he like what we're
seeing is that like people are becoming more and
more desperate and also like, I don't feel like
just like this. This economic desperation is like leading
the manosphere or also like women with labu boos,
it's just like soft gambling. It's not like day
trading, but it's like soft gambling with labu boos.
Um, IT'S, um, that has happened and also what
has happened, people are like looking for someone to
blame. And obviously, um, conservative elites would don't want
the finger pointed at them. So they're kind of
like funneling um the hate towards immigrants, for example,
or um marginalized groups like, oh, we're only in
this economic situation because disabled people are getting too
much welfare, um. It's crazy, obviously, um, and also
our country would probably not work without immigration. Um,
IN the UK like the UK is entirely based
on immigration. Like London is like an extremely diverse
country. Um, Germany also wouldn't work without immigration because
like. That like that it's the amount that has
like gone to immigrant work, like the amount of
work and actual important work like nursing work and
like um it's all being like held up by
immigrants, while people from Germany usually like get these
bullshit corporate jobs that end up not really doing
anything. Um, SO it's actually really important to have
immigration, um, also because like birth rates have plummeted
and like the country just like wouldn't work without.
Um, IMMIGRATION, but yeah, um, I feel like that
is happening, like the blame on like external things
or like women have become too woke, like that's
why the economy is crumbling because I have to
do the laundry myself now, um. So, yeah, I
feel like. The manosphere and like all of these
cultural phenomena that we're seeing is a direct outcome
of um the state of the economy.
And you know, I also find it interesting because
this sort of narratives and these sorts of um
political ideologies and economic ideologies make people feel responsible
for their own economic situation or it's on you
to improve your own economic situation, but I mean.
When, when capitalists, when, want to, uh, I mean
how should I put it, when they want to
make an argument for capitalism being the better economic
system, then. It's the system, it's not the people,
because if they're talking about, oh, we freed you
from feudalism, of course I mean freed from feudalism,
we could discuss that because immediately after feudalism, people
were working their asses off in factories to death,
were working to death in fact. But anyway, anyway,
er let's leave that aside for now. But I
mean, whenever they want to make an argument as
for why capitalism is better than socialism, for example,
oh then it's the system, and when they want
to blame socialism for its supposed failings, then it's
systemic. But when within neoliberal capitalism there's social. And
economic failings and it fails for a majority of
people on, oh, then it's on the individuals. Yeah,
yeah, 100%. Like the the successes of capitalism get
like put in the system, not like Elon Musk
is so great, that's why capitalism is great. No,
it's like the system has like brought up innovation,
but the failures is just like, oh, you as
an individual, you're too lazy, 100%.
So, um, I mean, I, I'm not sure if
you're interested in ethics or moral philosophy, but do
you, would you say that neoliberalism, because of the
effects it has had on society, would you say
it's morally wrong or not?
Um, I mean, no, that's It's a hard question,
obviously I, I personally think it is morally wrong
to want to pursue greed or like to um,
Continue to support this. Sort of ethically dubious framework
of having freedom for elites and misery for the
majority. Um, I do think that's, yeah, questionable to
say the least, um. And yeah, I just don't,
I just don't think that it's for society like
it's for the greater good. Like I feel like
the structural effects of like, um, that have led
us to inequality, loneliness, environmental collapse. I feel like
it's a lose-lose situation, except for like the very,
very, very few, um, of Uh, elites having the
freedom of doing whatever they want, um, shaping policy,
um, polluting the environment as much as they want,
um, exploiting workers, not just like in the country
like where they live, um, but like even worse,
like, uh, in, um, the global south, um, completely,
yeah. Taking advantage of like people in, for example,
Congo or um, For, uh, yeah, mining er cobalt
and whatnot, I feel like. There's a like the
grand majority of people are suffering under this framework
and I. I, I mean, I'm not an expert
on morality and I'm not an expert on ethics
or anything or ethical philosophy or whatnot, but um,
I'd just say it's a lose-lose situation.
By the way, on still on the topic of
self-improvement and since earlier I mentioned, uh, the madnesssphere
and the dating market, I, I just wanted to
hear your take on this because I, I've, I've
come across and heard some people. Talking about things
like high value men and high-value women. So, I
mean, what, what do you make of that? And,
and particularly as a woman, how do you feel
about uh people saying that some women are high
value and other women are low value and Men
should improve themselves to become attractive to high value
women because those are the ones worth pursuing. I
mean, uh, uh, in general, what do you make
of this sort of Uh, marketization of the, of
mating and dating.
I actually haven't thought a lot about like the
marketization of dating that much, also because I'm like
so disillusioned with like dating apps. I like generally
dating nowadays that I've just given up on it.
I'm just like, just gonna focus on my channel,
but um, all in all, yeah, that that's just
um, crazy and um also usually like, From personal
experience, I'd say people who focus on being like,
Perceived as societally higher value like, or like just
I can just say like, in in men, like
people like men who strive for that usually are
very boring personality wise. So I mean to each
their own, maybe there's like I I bet there's
like women who are like super into um, men
chasing money and power, um, from personal experience I've
just like noticed that um, Those are usually not
the funniest people and I don't know, like, life
is sad enough, I want someone funny, so, um,
yeah, I, I mean, but, but that that's definitely
like. Uh, I, I do feel like there's a
big development in, in the whole marketization of the
dating world, and I feel like especially with dating
apps like we've commodified, um, yeah, finding love and
it was also obviously like made made us more
superficial. I mean I've been on dating apps and
like obviously I swipe for how people look because
that's like all you can go off on like
on dating apps, um. And obviously I, I go
to the gym and try to self-improve because I'm
just so brainwashed by society to do that. And,
um, obviously and also because I've realized it's a
lot. Easier even to go through life, not just
in in the dating context, but like in in
the general context, like I have like this this
crazy um, Or like not this crazy idea, I
don't even think it's crazy, but I feel like
I, it would have been a lot more or
a lot less likely to land my er consulting
or banking job if I had been massively overweight.
Um, I feel like people judge appearance, um. And
that's definitely something we need to like work against
and and educate ourselves and um become more aware
of like what this actually does and that it's
actually not a meritocracy if like. You're like, you
get selected for jobs on appearance and um I
mean as for the dating market, um, Yeah, it's
sad. I feel like more more and more people
are becoming lonely because um they're chasing these um
superficial ideals or like get brainwashed into like chasing
these superficial ideals of high value men, high value
women, but like, um, in the end, um, we
all just end up alone. So, um, I feel
like it's kind of working against us as like.
Humanity, which is sad.
Well, I mean, but then you have people like
Andrew Tit going on on Piers Morgan and and
saying, and he doesn't feel uh like shame of
doing this at all. He says, oh, I'm sexy,
I'm rich, I'm, I'm, I'm intelligent, yeah, I mean,
uh, what are you doing there, man? I mean
if you were such a A high value man,
why do you need to like, uh, market it?
Why do you need to say that, that out
loud and why do you think that, uh, people
are attracted by that?
Yeah, no, 100%, and like, but the funny thing
is, I actually like, um, I think 2 years
ago or something, actually like, Date for a couple
of months I dated this guy who actually sometimes
would watch Andrew Tate videos. That was a time
where Andrew Tate was like, not like it's still
a big red flag and I literally, I told
my friends a lot, bro he's like literally sometimes
watching Andrew Tate videos, and we have this these
discussions but like in like, And like I obviously
always made a lot of fun of it, um,
and, and he eventually came to see the light,
um, Andrew Jay is just a massive, um, yeah,
uh, uh scam also, um, he just like it
makes like crypto pump and dump schemes and I
don't know what and like also, um. Traffics women,
I think. Um, BUT yeah, it
it seems so. Yeah.
But I feel like he like I was very
surprised to learn that someone that like because like
the guy's name was a normal person and he
was like he was funny and a kind human
and um, but would get reeled into um this
um this language and um, this ideology and I
I was very shocked at how for like very
normal. Men, it, it, it was. And I I
even talked about my like to my male friends
about it and somewhere like, yeah, but I mean
they do get. Get a bit of it because
like. Yeah, because they, they, they feel like they
have to like make this, um. Be like this
to like, be perceived valuable on dating apps, but
um. Yeah, I, I feel like. I'm mostly, I,
I don't know how to solve that problem, but
I feel like if we just have like a
kinder economy overall and, um. Yeah, don't, and make
sure that everyone eats and um. Yeah, and has
health insurance and stuff like that. I I feel
like that also, uh, that status driven dating would
also become less, um, maybe people just chase that
because they feel like they're they're scared for the
future and, um, need to do that in order
to like secure an economically viable future for themselves,
um. Yeah, but I don't really know how to
solve that problem.
No, look, me neither, me neither. Uh, BUT I,
I mean, it's funny that you mentioned that you
dated the guy who, who looked or watched Andrew
Retreat because, uh, I think a few years ago,
last 1 or 2 years ago or something like
that. People freaked out on Twitter, er, or guys
specifically freaked out on Twitter because they found out
that, uh, women were, er, dumping them or, I
mean, deciding just not to have, uh not to
date them if they said they watched Joe Rogan.
So,
yeah, I feel like that is also like, um,
actually I was talking to my again to my
friend Gary about this the other day, literally about
this and that's something that very much annoys me
about lefty culture is like this. Oh yeah, we
don't speak to people who have other opinions or
like, um, because I actually had a lot of
fun like discussing, um, if you ever watched this
is. It really fun for the for him. But
like we literally discussed loads of um, we we
discussed this Andrew Tate narrative a lot and it
was really interesting and it was really interesting for
me to see like where he was coming from.
And he he listened to where I was coming
from and it was just all in all, like
an interesting conversation, uh, we're still friends and um,
I feel like, Yeah, it is really, really important
to like hear each other out, and I feel
like that really annoys me about like lefty culture
is about like, oh yeah, I don't speak to
anyone who like um listens to Andrew Tate or
even worse, like, oh no, right when people are
all fascists or right when people are like in
Germany, like especially like in Berlin, like where I
was living for a while now, um, people will
be like, oh yeah, he's such a Nazi, where
I'm like, Kind of hard to like convince someone
of your points if you call them a Nazi.
And same thing goes for like, um, Andrew Tay.
If like obviously Andrew Tay is a deeply problematic
figure, but I feel like, um, he obviously like
struck a struck a chord with young men and
we need to talk to them and re-educate them
instead of being like, oh no, not talking to
you anymore and goodbye.
Yeah, I mean, I don't know if you are
aware of these statistics, but, um, they came out,
uh, or I got across them last year and
then they did the same here in Portugal and
the trend seems to be the same because across
the world, it seems that among young people, women,
young women are moving further to the left and
the young men are moving, moving further to the
right. So I'm not sure if in terms of
Uh, political, uh, uh, I mean political compatibility or
uh, uh, I'm not sure if that would also
have an effect in terms of being harder for
people to find a partner. I mean, because usually
people like to be in relationships where their partner
is politically aligned with them.
Yeah, no, 100%. I mean, like, for, like, I
don't think I could date someone who's like super
economically right wing or like a libertarian or like
someone who's like super neoliberal. I, I feel like
we'd have too hard of a time. And with,
with that guy, like the Andrew Tate thing was
like the only thing, but he was pretty left
otherwise. So, we did get along like on like
this economic, um, theory bit, but, um, yeah, that
probably also, um, makes things harder, um. In dating
and um. That's also really interesting, but I feel
like um that, um, I feel like it's, it's
a lot of times because like women work a
a lot more in like, the care sector, like
as in teaching, nursing, um, even being doctors, just
like the um, The The kind of professions where
you really see and feel inequality and where like
um, the effects are coming out much stronger, whereas
men a lot of time get pushed into jobs
like finance and um where you just like sit
in front of a spreadsheet and like, just like
calculate the best ROI but you don't really see
the effects it actually has on like um, Real
humans, so, um, that might be a point why,
um, this is happening, um, but also I'm not
an expert, so.
No, that's fine. OK, so look, uh, we're getting
close to 2 hours here, so would you just
like to tell people where, uh, uh, not where,
but what you're, what your next video and what
are you working on right now?
Um, SO right now, um, I'm definitely working on
finishing my neoliberalism series. So I'm gonna like make
one more part that like talking about Thatcher and
Reagan and also about like the impacts of like
self-esteem we're seeing because like self-esteem, uh, experience. Like
this, uh, it's like similar to like self like
the the self improvement obsession. We've also become like
very, very, um, into the whole notion of self
esteem and being confident no matter what and what
not. And that's actually something that happened in the
70s, um, with the rise of like corporate culture.
So like when, um, Yeah, a nation of like,
Mine workers or workers in general became like turned
into like a nation of salesmen where like, jobs
nowadays, especially white collar jobs are all about like
selling stuff or like just like making a PowerPoint
presentation and just like, seeming confident helps you a
lot more, so like people have become like obsessed
with like, um, self-esteem and also like in popular
psychology that's like completely like um, Yeah, taken over
that we all are supposed to love ourselves no
matter what. And it is also, I feel like
contributed a little bit to like narcissistic tendencies in,
um, at times, um. So, yeah, that's also something
I'm working on. And also after I finished the
whole neoliberalism series, um, I also kind of um,
um, yeah, I I kind of want to finish
it now. I feel like I've had enough of
it. And, um, I want to like go more
into like because my backgrounds, uh, I come from
finance. I feel like a lot of people don't
really understand finance. I mean they will. Like if
things are well, they'll know what a stock is
and what a stock market is. But, um, I
feel like a lot of people don't understand, for
example, how big the derivatives market in the market
is and, um, how the banking system actually works.
I feel like my next video series will be
on. Um, FINANCIALIZATION about the derivatives market and for
example, like stock options that CEOs don't really get
paid in money, but like what lets them avoid
taxes is that they get paid in stock options.
So, um, I wanna expand my viewers' understanding on
that in the next series. But yeah, so that's
it, but it's a lot of work and, um,
I like to procrastinate, so.
No, look, I really, really love your videos. They're
apart from the uh actual informational content itself, they
are very, very well made, so, uh, and, uh,
I mean, I'm going to tag you on my
YouTube video and put your Instagram in the description,
anyplace else on the internet where people can find
you.
Um, NO, not really. I'm just on YouTube and,
uh, I have a tiny Instagram account, but mainly
YouTube. Like I don't do much on Instagram. Uh,
I mostly do YouTube and I wanna focus mainly
on YouTube. I much prefer long form to short
form content, um, as you probably do too. It's
just, yeah, nicer to go in depth. And, um,
yeah, no, that's, uh, all where I exist.
OK, great. So look, it's been really, really nice
to have you on the show and the conversation
was great and it was also great to finally
meet you. So thank you so much for doing
this.
Thank you, sir, so much. I really enjoyed it
and uh I thought it was really inspiring and
uh motivating as well for my next videos and
it was really helpful for me too.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgius Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.